4                                      1 Introduction

law with the linear ﬂux function f (q) = Aq. Many physical problems give rise to nonli-
near conservation laws in which f (q) is a nonlinear function of q, a vector of conserved
quantities.


                                    1.1.1 Integral Form
Conservation laws typically arise most naturally from physical laws in an integral form as
developed in Chapter 2, stating that for any two points x1 and x2 ,
                          x2
                     d
                              q(x, t) d x = f (q(x1 , t)) − f (q(x2 , t)).           (1.10)
                     dt x1
Each component of q measures the density of some conserved quantity, and the equation
(1.10) simply states that the “total mass” of this quantity between any two points can change
only due to the ﬂux past the endpoints. Such conservation laws naturally hold for many
fundamental physical quantities. For example, the advection equation (1.2) for the density
of a contaminant is derived from the fact that the total mass of the contaminant is conserved
as it ﬂows down the pipe and the ﬂux function is f (q) = ūq. If the total mass of contaminant
is not conserved, because of chemical reactions taking place, for example, then the con-
servation law must also contain source terms as described in Section 2.5, Chapter 17, and
elsewhere.
   The constant-coefﬁcient linear acoustics equations (1.5) can be viewed as conservation
laws for pressure and velocity. Physically, however, these are not conserved quantities
except approximately in the case of very small amplitude disturbances in uniform media. In
Section 2.7 the acoustics equations are derived from the Euler equations of gas dynamics,
the nonlinear conservation laws that model more general disturbances in a compressible gas.
These equations model the conservation of mass, momentum, and energy, and the laws of
physics determine the ﬂux functions. See Section 2.6 and Chapter 14 for these derivations.
These equations have been intensively studied and used in countless computations because
of their importance in aerodynamics and elsewhere.
   There are many other systems of conservation laws that are important in various appli-
cations, and several are used in this book as examples. However, the Euler equations play a
special role in the historical development of the techniques discussed in this book. Much of
the mathematical theory of nonlinear conservation laws was developed with these equations
in mind, and many numerical methods were developed speciﬁcally for this system. So, al-
though the theory and methods are applicable much more widely, a good knowledge of the
Euler equations is required in order to read much of the available literature and beneﬁt from
these developments. A brief introduction is given in Chapter 14. It is a good idea to become
familiar with these equations even if your primary interest is far from gas dynamics.


                              1.1.2 Discontinuous Solutions
The differential equation (1.8) can be derived from the integral equation (1.10) by simple
manipulations (see Chapter 2) provided that q and f (q) are sufﬁciently smooth. This proviso
is important because in practice many interesting solutions are not smooth, but contain
discontinuities such as shock waves. A fundamental feature of nonlinear conservation laws
