                                  1.2 Finite Volume Methods                                     5

is that these discontinuities can easily develop spontaneously even from smooth initial data,
and so they must be dealt with both mathematically and computationally.
   At a discontinuity in q, the partial differential equation (1.8) does not hold in the classical
sense and it is important to remember that the integral conservation law (1.10) is the more
fundamental equation which does continue to hold. A rich mathematical theory of shock-
wave solutions to conservation laws has been developed. This theory is introduced starting
in Chapter 11.


                                 1.2 Finite Volume Methods
Discontinuities lead to computational difﬁculties and the main subject of this book is the
accurate approximation of such solutions. Classical ﬁnite difference methods, in which
derivatives are approximated by ﬁnite differences, can be expected to break down near
discontinuities in the solution where the differential equation does not hold. This book
concerns ﬁnite volume methods, which are based on the integral form (1.10) instead of
the differential equation. Rather than pointwise approximations at grid points, we break
the domain into grid cells and approximate the total integral of q over each grid cell, or
actually the cell average of q, which is this integral divided by the volume of the cell. These
values are modiﬁed in each time step by the ﬂux through the edges of the grid cells, and the
primary problem is to determine good numerical ﬂux functions that approximate the correct
ﬂuxes reasonably well, based on the approximate cell averages, the only data available. We
will concentrate primarily on one class of high-resolution ﬁnite volume methods that have
proved to be very effective for computing discontinuous solutions. See Section 6.3 for an
introduction to the properties of these methods.
   Other classes of methods have also been applied to hyperbolic equations, such as ﬁnite
element methods and spectral methods. These are not discussed directly in this book,
although much of the material presented here is good background for understanding high-
resolution versions.


                                  1.2.1 Riemann Problems
A fundamental tool in the development of ﬁnite volume methods is the Riemann problem,
which is simply the hyperbolic equation together with special initial data. The data is
piecewise constant with a single jump discontinuity at some point, say x = 0,
                                         
                                           ql if x < 0,
                               q(x, 0) =                                         (1.11)
                                           qr if x > 0.

If Q i−1 and Q i are the cell averages in two neighboring grid cells on a ﬁnite volume grid, then
by solving the Riemann problem with ql = Q i−1 and qr = Q i , we can obtain information
that can be used to compute a numerical ﬂux and update the cell averages over a time
step. For hyperbolic problems the solution to the Riemann problem is typically a similarity
solution, a function of x/t alone, and consists of a ﬁnite set of waves that propagate away
from the origin with constant wave speeds. For linear hyperbolic systems the Riemann
problem is easily solved in terms of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix A, as
