6                                       1 Introduction

developed in Chapter 3. This simple structure also holds for nonlinear systems of equations
and the exact solution (or arbitrarily good approximations) to the Riemann problem can be
constructed even for nonlinear systems such as the Euler equations. The theory of nonlinear
Riemann solutions for scalar problems is developed in Chapter 11 and extended to systems
in Chapter 13.
   Computationally, the exact Riemann solution is often too expensive to compute for non-
linear problems and approximate Riemann solvers are used in implementing numerical
methods. These techniques are developed in Section 15.3.


                            1.2.2 Shock Capturing vs. Tracking
Since the PDEs continue to hold away from discontinuities, one possible approach is to
combine a standard ﬁnite difference or ﬁnite volume method in smooth regions with some
explicit procedure for tracking the location of discontinuities. This is the numerical analogue
of the mathematical approach in which the PDEs are supplemented by jump conditions
across discontinuities. This approach is often called shock tracking or front tracking. In more
than one space dimension, discontinuities typically lie along curves (in two dimensions) or
surfaces (in three dimensions), and such algorithms typically become quite complicated.
Moreover, in realistic problems there may be many such surfaces that interact in complicated
ways as time evolves. This approach will not be discussed further in this book. For some
examples and discussion, see [41], [66], [103], [153], [154], [171], [207], [289], [290],
[321], [322], [371], [372].
   Instead we concentrate here on shock-capturing methods, where the goal is to capture
discontinuities in the solution automatically, without explicitly tracking them. Discontinu-
ities must then be smeared over one or more grid cells. Success requires that the method
implicitly incorporate the correct jump conditions, reduce smearing to a minimum, and not
introduce nonphysical oscillations near the discontinuities. High-resolution ﬁnite volume
methods based on Riemann solutions often perform well and are much simpler to implement
than shock-tracking methods.


                             1.3 Multidimensional Problems
The Riemann problem is inherently one-dimensional, but is extensively used also in the
solution of multidimensional hyperbolic problems. A two-dimensional ﬁnite volume grid
typically consists of polygonal grid cells; quadrilaterals or triangles are most commonly
used. A Riemann problem normal to each edge of the cell can be solved in order to determine
the ﬂux across that edge. In three dimensions each face of a ﬁnite volume cell can be
approximated by a plane, and a Riemann problem normal to this plane solved in order
to compute the ﬂux. Multidimensional problems are discussed in the Part III of the book,
starting with an introduction to the mathematical theory in Chapter 18.
   If the ﬁnite volume grid is rectangular, or at least logically rectangular, then the simplest
way to extend one-dimensional high-resolution methods to more dimensions is to use di-
mensional splitting, a fractional-step approach in which one-dimensional problems along
each coordinate direction are solved in turn. This approach, which is often surprisingly ef-
fective in practice, is discussed in Section 19.5. In some cases a more fully multidimensional
